>> Maria, very warm
welcome to you.
Thank you so much for
taking the time to join us.
>> That's wonderful.
Thank you for inviting me here
to the Healthy Me Summits.
>> Maria, again, I'm in a place
where I get to sit and listen
to the most amazing stories and
to learn how these individuals
have come from a place
of trauma, adversity,
and pull themselves out of what
I honestly cannot even relate
to on so many levels.
I'm just-- I sit in awe.
And what it gives
me is the confidence
that when I listen
to these stories,
that I know that there is
a way, no matter how dark
we feel the times and
experiences can be,
that there is a
way out of those.
And you're somebody who has come
from nothing, from addiction,
prostitution, to bipolar,
to now where you are,
which is the founder
of an amazing charity,
"Coaching with Substance,"
that won 2014 Best Charity.
It's not for profit.
>> That's correct.
>> Which is an unbelievable
feat in itself.
>> Yes.
>> So would you share a little
bit about your journey with us
and just where it began?
>> Sure, sure.
Well, I'm almost 40 and I
was born in the Philippines.
At 11 years old, I came
from the Philippines
to Australia on my own because
my mother and father separated,
and my mother couldn't
come to pick me up
in the Philippines
because of papers that
just wasn't happening yet.
My-- her husband at that
time that's Australian died.
So I had to come
from the Philippines
on the plane for nine
hours on my own at 11.
It was petrifying.
And then I came to Australia
and it wasn't the best childhood
because my mother was going
through a lot of issues
back at that time.
And there you have it, at
13-year-old I was already
taking meth and hanging with
the wrong crowd, drinking and--
yeah.
So it just kind of went
downhill from there.
And at 14 years old I was
sent back to the Philippines
and I was getting heavier and
heavier into my shabu, or meth
use, and somehow when I
was in the Philippines,
my dad had a friend that
owned a travel agency.
So he got me working
there at 14 years old.
And because I was so
bubbly and personable,
I sold the most
travels to Australia
because I just came
from Australia.
And
I was able to save for
my ticket from Manila
to Australia by the
time I turned 15.
Because at 15 years old,
it was 75% off the ticket
because I worked
in a travel agency.
So next thing you know, I was on
the plane back from Australia--
from Philippines back
to Australia on my own.
Because at that time, my mother
just won't talk to me anymore
and Philippines is just too poor
a country for me to really make
something of it there.
Because we just-- we'll
give you an example.
We lived in a place where
we're paying about $100 a month
and there were eight
people living there.
So you can imagine what type
of a place it is in Makati.
So that wasn't a future for
me, so I came to Australia.
And it just-- it's like
one of those things
that just keeps getting
worse and worse and worse.
Even if I was in Australia,
I had no parents.
No one telling me
not to do anything.
No one telling me what
right and wrong is.
>> No boundaries.
>> Oh, god, no.
And have-- having my mom
rejected me at that time.
So you can imagine in our teens
we had such low self-esteem
issues, right?
Well, mine was like 20 times
lower self-esteem than most.
So it wasn't long
before I was 18
and I was already
working in an agency,
selling my body for the
drugs that I was using.
And, yeah, so got involved
with many Yakuza and Triad,
those types of people.
And I went to Japan to
hostess is what you call that.
But actually, I went
there as a model.
And then when I got there, I
decided that all the models
there would do work
at night, which
is what the hostess thing was.
So I did that for
a long time and got
involved with the
Yakuza and Triad people.
And just for a good 10
years I was using meth
and Coke and all the drugs.
And anxiety issues,
I was always so--
just the palpitations.
I was so scared
because I didn't know
who's going to take care of me.
I didn't know how
I was going to eat.
What am I going to do.
I lived no where.
Just off the-- the
clothes off my back.
And at 23 got bipolar.
My mom wanted to speak
to me, so she invited
me to go back to Australia.
When I first saw her, all the--
gosh, all the fear and all
the kind of feeling of,
you didn't take care of me,
just smacked me in the face
and I got ill.
I got psychotic and I went
to Toowoomba Base Hospital
and I was institutionalized
for three whole months.
>> So, Maria, when you spent
time in the institution,
when you were institutionalized
for that three month period,
was that your first time
that you had actually weaned
yourself off the various
substances over the seven years
that you had been addicted to?
>> Gosh, that's a
question and a half.
It-- my addiction is--
it's just a constant
underlying current
that happened in my life.
It wasn't-- well, I'd like to
say it didn't really ruin me.
But looking back, it really did.
When I would take Coke,
it'll be for a whole weekend.
If I got on the methamphetamine,
it'll be for weeks at a time.
If I go clubbing--
I was a nightclub girl, so
Thursday, Friday, Saturday
night we'd just be
drinking all night.
So I haven't really
thought to myself
prior to getting sick
or institutionalized
that I need to stop.
It was still too new,
even if it started at 13.
Yeah, I just didn't
think it was problematic.
So, yeah, it really was the
first time that I stopped.
>> So you spent
three months in a--
being in an asylum.
>> Yes.
>> What occurred then?
What followed after
those three months?
>> You wouldn't believe
it, but that was--
after I was released, I actually
had my first suicide attempt,
because it's a crippling
feeling when you're young
and you think you've got
your whole life ahead of you
and you think you're
pretty and you think you've
got a control on
men, that you're now
bipolar or
schizophreniform disorder
is what they called it.
And they say you can
see if you can do drugs.
I don't recommend
it, but because
of your systems in your head,
you get high quite easily.
It's really detrimental to you.
So I was like, that's it.
If I can't escape from the pain
of being rejected and being
alone and really having
no one to go back to,
then I really don't
want this life anymore.
And so I was on so many
pills so I drank it all.
And apparently, my mom
came home from shopping
because she was
doing her shopping
and she just had a really--
feeling inside her so she
went home straight away,
found me overdosed, and
went and got hospitalized.
So it's funny how you picked
up like, you were saying what
happened straight after that?
Well, that's what happened.
Yeah.
>> Wow.
And so was it the one attempt,
or did you try multiple times?
>> There were a few
more times after that.
One other time was
when I was at Uni.
I was trying so hard.
But for some reason, I just
felt like I was different.
And I was getting
disability support pension
and all sorts of things.
And it just felt weird.
And again, because I really
had a taste of it once
and my mom was around,
I thought, well--
this time I was at a dorm
at Griffith Uni in Brisbane,
and I thought, well, this time
no one's going to be home.
No one's going to save me.
This is going to be it.
But somehow someone
found me again
and I was back to the hospital
and still survived that one.
So come to think of it, I
guess whoever is up there,
really didn't want
me to go because I've
got this great mission
that I'm living right now.
So that's probably
why I didn't go then
no matter how hard I tried.
>> You know what's also
interesting is is what
I've read of your story.
It's as if-- it was as if
there was a changing moment.
But for you the changing
moment was very, very clear.
And this is as if
it was just one day
you decided I'm no longer
going to live this life.
>> Sure.
>> Was it that kind
of black and white?
>> It seems that way probably
because when I wrote my book I
was in a good place.
So when I wrote it, it was
almost like when I wrote it in,
it was like, this is the
moment that I pre-picked
because I was in a good
place as opposed to I
wasn't in a good place then.
But it was that way.
It was a culmination of one
mistake after the other.
And when a mistake
happens, it's like, gosh, I
better learn from this.
And another mistake happens
and learn from this one.
I haven't done this
mistake before.
And this one, I've got
to learn from this.
So, no, it wasn't immediate.
Although, three-- around three
years ago, I was with this man
that wasn't a nice guy at all.
And at that time, that was kind
of like the moment when I said,
oh, my gosh, because I fell back
in to meth use for five months.
And I already had the
charity built by then.
And I thought, my god, how can
I be your solution to addiction?
And the reason why
that happened was I
was in a very good
relationship but it fell apart.
And he, being the pastor's
son, came into my life.
And he was using meth
and he was injecting me.
And also-- he knew my
history because we--
I knew him when I
was 19 years old.
And he knew that if
he could inject me,
then I'll be back
in my old ways.
Yeah.
So-- yeah, after that time
when I fell and I went back
into the hospital to psychiatric
ward in the Philippines,
and then I came to Australia,
also went in in Australia.
I'm like, wow, 10 times.
I think I better stop now.
And I met a monk after that.
And that was really
the pivotal moment
where I took the right turn and
it was right from there on in.
>> So you met a monk
here in Australia.
>> Yes.
Yes, yes, yes.
So I came from my very
sad and sordid experience,
and I went to domestic
violence court, him
and his gangs were all look--
trying to look for
me and threatening me
and really trying to
get me back into what
they were trying to do.
And I approached a
friend and I said,
do you know anyone
that can help me?
He goes-- and he's
telling me-- you've
been telling me about this
monk that knows Kung Fu.
He sounds like he
can protect me.
Can you call him and tell him
that I'm coming to see him?
Maybe he can help me out.
And so she did.
And now when I saw him, it was
a pretty immediate connection.
And we knew that there
was something there.
But obviously, I
was too traumatized.
And he's good not
to do anything then.
But many months
later, it came to
that this was the
right thing to do
for both of our kind of
goals, spiritual goals.
>> And so what did
transpire with the monk?
>> What happened was he helped
me through that moment where
all these people were after me.
He trained me body wise.
So he taught me Qigong, which is
a breathing exercise, Tai Chi.
And, yeah, it's just pretty
much training every day.
Because he said if
your body is good,
if you can put down
a person that's
trying to-- like self-defense,
if someone's trying to come
at you from behind or
there's people with guns,
this is what you do.
And I started training
my body in that way.
And of course, he taught
me stillness, as well.
So with the stillness practices
and the Kung Fu practices
and the Qigong and the Tai
Chi, and the constant spiritual
insights that he
would impart upon me--
because we lived together.
It was like a 24/7--
having the Dalai Lama beside you
and asking him all the deepest
questions in the world.
Having that really opened
my mind and my heart
and got me on the
road to healing.
>> Wow.
Wow, it's amazing.
>> It's a happy ending.
>> And this is the beauty of
the sharing is with so many
of the people that have
volunteered to share
their stories.
It is-- we call it a happy
ending but a lot of suffering
and heartache along the way.
>> Sure.
Sure, it is like a
metamorphosis, isn't it?
>> It is.
>> I think you need to be--
and before they turn into a--
from the caterpillar to the
butterfly they are broken down.
Every single cell
is broken down.
And that's definitely
what happened to me.
I was broken down and
had so many experiences.
And I thought, well,
why is this needed?
>> Well, that was going to be
my next question is, literally,
you coming to a
realization of, well,
what's all this
experiencing been for?
Why have I experienced this.
Why have I made these choices?
>> It's crystal clear now why.
It's because I coach people with
addiction and mental illness
issues.
And they come to me
with their stories
and it's almost like
"Slumdog Millionaire."
They'll come with
this story and I'll
have an experience
exactly the parallel
or the same as that experience.
So if they come at me with
a domestic violence story,
I can say, I know exactly
where you're coming from.
And they will feel in their
heart that I really know.
And then that deep kind of
connection will be built.
And then from my experience,
I'll tell a couple of tips
and they'll take it and
they'll run with it.
Because they know
that I've been there.
And if it's a sex
work experience,
is it a stripping in
a club experience,
is it a hostessing experience,
or is it a sexual abuse
experience, is it ostracized by
parents and family experience?
Is it a night clubbing
and binging experience?
So many experiences,
all of that was
being made seen by
me-- or I saw them
so that when people
are presenting
those types of issues with
me, nothing beats experience.
If someone probably
came to you and said
I've been on methamphetamine
and all sorts of things,
you probably will just be
going, oh, what can I say?
It's hard when you're not coming
from a place of experience.
And it's hard when
you're not coming
from a place of experience
and successfully turned away
from it.
So having that story
and hearing and saying,
I know exactly what you mean.
That kind of
happened to me, too.
It just makes them like,
she's not judging me.
And, my gosh, she's
doing her PhD.
She runs a charity.
She's finished her
masters and, look,
she's so loving and personable.
If she's not broken by
what I'm going through now,
there is a hope.
And that's exactly
why it's beautiful
what I've been through.
Because now, I can impart
that hope and that inspiration
to other people.
>> So Maria, one of the things
that you said which I think is
so prevalent is not
only have you recovered,
but you haven't gone back.
And--
>> It's a miracle.
>> Exactly.
Which is the greatest challenge
is an addiction and it's word.
>> Yes.
>> So what sort of lifestyle
changes and disciplines have
you had to commit to in order
to ensure that there hasn't been
a turnaround?
>> Sure.
And I just want to clarify
because depression and anxiety
was a big part of my
life, because I just
don't want to alienate
maybe some of the audiences
with depression
and anxiety issues,
very much a part of what
was happening to me.
I was very scared
to talk to people.
And no energy to
go into anything.
And what-- why I'm saying that
is because the reason why I
haven't gone back there
is because of yoga,
stillness or meditation,
eating well, really raw--
raw food.
And just-- I just cut out
anything that is in a can,
in a--
anything that wasn't pulled
from the roots off the ground.
So if I ate everything
fresh fruits and veggies
and then everyday I
find the time to stretch
my body with yoga, whichever
one that I can pick up
on YouTube, and also 20 minutes
in the morning, 20 minutes at
night, I do what you call
transcendental meditation.
And saying my mantra and
doing TM also helps me.
And those are the reasons
why I haven't gone back.
>> So TM being the
transcendental meditation?
>> Yes, yes.
>> OK.
>> So a few people do it.
Oprah and her crew,
they do that--
they did that at Harpo Studios.
Russell Brand, Cameron
Diaz, Liv Tyler, you know,
Ellen DeGeneres.
So a lot of people
have picked up
that technique of meditation.
Although, any meditation
technique will do.
It's just that with
transcendental meditation,
you get cognized
a mantra that is
the essence of your vibration,
and it gets whispered
to you by a Yogic monk,
one of Maharishi's teachers--
and it takes them two,
three years to study--
and just before they
become a teacher,
they need to go into
seclusion for five months.
So they're really--
they can really
go into and cognize
your vibration
and tell you what
your mantra is.
And the virtue of saying
that twice a day, 20 minutes,
20 minutes, really
enlivens your cells
and gets you going
deep into the source--
or what they call
the unified field--
where all of the
information lays
for us to just pick at
and take back out with us
in the real life.
So it's probably
a bit weary there.
>> No, I-- well, for me
I completely resonate
and the audience, I believe,
that those that are ready
to hear that will
take it on board.
>> Beautiful.
>> And part of Healthy Me
Summit is about delivering
information, education,
and solutions.
And hoping that the minds
and hearts of people
are open enough to take
what they're ready to hear.
>> That's right.
>> So I have a few questions
around, first of all,
is there any research out
there that shows the relevance
to addictions, be it drug
addictions or addictions
themselves, being the precursor
to depression, anxiety,
or anxiety and depression being
the precursor to then falling
into an addiction?
>> Yes.
I did a bit of research on
that, because we were talking
about maybe this could be us.
And I couldn't find anything--
because I didn't have the time.
But what I really wanted
to say to you is my PhD,
which will be coming out soon--
>> Which is on?
>> The efficacy of recovery
coaching on people with poly
drug use issues, comorbid,
with depression and anxiety.
In real word-- or in
real terms, people
with depression and
anxiety and using drugs.
How is coaching impacting that?
On full level-- on full streams.
One is mental clarity.
One is emotional stability.
The other one is
recovery capital.
And then obviously,
the lessening
of the alcohol and
the drug usage.
So I'll be definitely
looking into that question
of depression and anxiety.
Does it lead into addiction,
or the other way around?
Does addiction lead to
depression and anxiety issues?
Because I'll be getting
them to fill out some forms.
So I'll definitely be
getting to the bottom
of that particular answer.
>> Awesome.
And with your Foundation
and the nature of your work,
you would certainly have
some stats and some dollars
in terms of the
kind of resources
that is going towards
the drain on our society.
What does that look
like these days?
>> That doesn't look too good.
$26 billion was
spent specifically
in just one year
on tobacco smoking,
because it's the number one
drug kind of burden of disease,
if you want to call it.
>> Legalized burden of disease.
>> Yeah.
And It's $26 billion in one year
that they spent on prevention
and treatment and
hospitalization,
and all sorts of
things, assurances.
Another figure is with alcohol
use, they say one in six--
well, they say Queenslanders
are at the top of the binge
drinking.
Oh, sorry, number two.
And one in six drink at the
riskiest levels, or a binge
drink, at the riskiest level.
So one in six is
a hell of a lot.
And that's what
Queenslanders drink at.
And out of the one
in six, one in four--
one in four has been a victim
of alcohol related violence
or abuse.
So that's really massive.
Another step that I was reading
about is on the weekends,
there's about 60,000
emergency admissions
for alcohol kind of issues.
So again, alcohol is
the biggest issue.
So alcohol and smoking
are actually the top two.
And then illicit drugs--
marijuana is the top--
11.2% prevalence.
So 11.2% of the population
smoke marijuana adversely.
And heroin and all that
actually less than 1%.
So it's not a big thing.
But it's still a big issue.
Marijuana is right--
sorry, methamphetamine
is rising, coming
up to almost 3%.
And I guess with
the heavy effects
that methamphetamine
has, 3% is a lot.
Because if 3% of the population
are rendered incapable
by methamphetamine, they
really don't amount to much.
Because out of 612,000 are
disability support recipients.
OK.
And out of the 612,000, 42%
have psychiatric disorders,
comorbid with addiction issues.
So that's almost half
of the recipients.
And they're saying the job
service providers have put out
this research that 27%
of these set of people
with psychiatric
disorders, they actually
have very low employment
participation.
So they're one of the
lowest of even people
with intellectual disabilities.
And out of all the
disability stream,
27% are at the
lowest of not wanting
to go back to work
because they're just
not capable with their
mental illness issues.
So it really is
costing us a lot,
as if we don't already know.
And those are just some of the
statistics that prove that.
>> Maria, you are the
author of four bestsellers.
Can you just tell us a little
bit about each of those?
>> Yeah, sure.
So the first one is what
we've talked about today,
it's called, "Kill Your
Addiction Before it Kills You."
How I transformed my life
of addictions, bipolar,
and suicide.
So it goes through
my experiences
in addiction, my psychiatric
institutionalizations,
and my suicide attempts, in
the hope of getting someone
to go and change their
life with me as I
go to the end of that story.
The second book is
"Kill Their Addiction
Before it Kills All of You."
And it's specifically written
for the parent, the loved one,
the spouse, the brother,
the sister, the husband,
the boyfriend.
What they can do to support the
recovery of their loved one.
The third book is probably the
most monumental book for me.
It is "SIT With Monk Xu,
Modern Day Special Insights--
Special Insights Training with
a Modern Day Taoist Monk."
Because my partner, the one
I was telling you before,
is a Taoist Monk.
And it just goes through
my spiritual insights,
that light bulb moments that
helped me turn my life around.
So I documented those
in that third book.
And the last book is "From Rock
Bottom to Sky's the Limit."
How to become a recovery
coach in six months or less.
And that just walks
someone through--
they're in recovery.
They're going-- looking
back at their life.
What a bit of a train wreck.
Is there anything there that
I can use to help people.
And I say, yes, become
a recovery coach.
Because as a recovery
coach, you can
use every single one
of those experiences
because someone out there--
100 people out there are going
to have those experiences.
And you can actually walk
them through as a coach.
>> So in regards to the
actual coaching component,
so you run a Foundation called,
"Coaching with Substance."
>> That's correct.
>> What are some of the key
components that you actually
coach within that model?
>> Sure.
We-- I use a 12 session series.
Because there is research
that's been done.
Takes 21 days to break down
a habit, and another couple
of months to kind of put
it together and give them
a new strong habit
to replace that.
So it's a 12 session system.
And the greatest
component about it
is, is the sitting down
in the first session.
And I really get
down to their values,
getting them to the
core of their being.
Reviewing all
areas of their life
and letting them pick
three specific areas
that they want to work with me
on for the next 11 sessions.
So that we can write down
some tangible, inspirational
challenging goals
and we make sure
it happens at a predetermined
period of time in the future.
So that's what I usually do.
We do a lot of vision
board exercises.
We do a lot of visualization.
And the greatest thing that
I do with them is I actually
go and meditate with them.
I do yoga with them.
I do-- I cook foods for them.
I might go to their place,
look at their cupboard,
and take out things
which is probably
everything in the cupboard
that's got sugar and not
healthy for you.
So I'm very practical and hands
on in my approach as a coach.
And also-- I do use
NLP, but I'm not
very big on what you
call the modalities.
So I'm sorry, because I just
naturally practice them.
And then I'll hear from other
coaches EFT, and I'm like,
I do that.
So definitely NLP,
I'm trained in that.
But because my training--
I've got my master's
in public health.
And they've got a lot of
mental health kind of tools
that they've given us through
my master's coursework.
So I use a lot of those things.
And because I also
am ongoing with
my peer reciprocal coaching
in international coaching
federation, you've got what
you call reciprocal coaching.
So I always get coached
by other coaches.
And then I have
to coach someone.
So it's a reciprocal.
So I learn about other
people's techniques
through other coaches
that are better than me
and incorporate
whatever those things
are in my coaching practice.
>> And it's forever,
forever evolving.
I know that as
myself as a coach.
We're always picking
up new ways of relating
the information and new ways
of teaching a particular tool--
>> That's right.
>> --in the hope that somebody
is going to resonate with--
they might not resonate with it
one way, but said another way,
or shown another way--
>> That's right.
>> --they'll resonate.
And the greatest thing
about what I do with clients
is we've got thousands and
thousands of video logs,
because I videotape
every single interaction
and give them a copy so that--
>> Wow, that's powerful.
>> It is very, very, very.
As you know with
actors and actresses,
they look at themselves
in the mirror.
So this is their way of
looking at themselves
and hearing the
lies or the denials
that they might still
be in ensconced in
or in that they don't see it
until they look at the tape.
And I'm like, remember that
in the session 2, you said,
oh, yeah, I've stopped.
And in session 6,
you still haven't.
But you're telling
me you've stopped.
See how believable you were.
So it really helps them.
It helps me as a coach because I
show that tape to my supervisor
and to my mentor and
they listen to it
and they give me very,
very detailed feedback
about my coaching practice.
Yeah.
>> Wonderful.
Maria, again, very
inspirational.
I have one last question.
>> Oh, OK.
>> One last question that we're
asking all of our speakers.
And it's around-- it's
around the I am statement,
around the power of I am.
And we know that with any mental
health depression or anxiety,
or any form of
mental health issue,
the reframing of
who we are and how
we see ourselves is so important
on that healing journey.
>> Yes.
>> And the power of I am
has been said through--
throughout time by
philosophers and now
validated through neuroscience.
So the real question is, what do
you wake up reminding yourself
of every morning?
What is your I am?
>> I am.
Well, power is a
big thing for me.
So I am powerful.
I am full.
I am strong, and
that type of thing.
Because working with people
with addiction issues,
they will do everything in
their power to manipulate.
And it's al-- it's also
kind of in the subconscious.
So I really have to
be strong and very--
really something that
they can lean on.
So, yeah, powerful
is something that I
would say I am every
time I take on my day.
Yeah.
>> Beautiful.
Maria, thank you so
much for joining us.
It's been an absolute pleasure.
Thank you for sharing your
journey and your inspiration
to everyone.
>> My pleasure.
Thank you very
much for having me.